
# Practical Assignment 3: REST API
| Course | Author | Year | 
|--------|------------------|----|
|  Data architecture | Anatolii Stehnii | 2019| 

## Introduction
The goal of this assignment is to build a web application with a set of REST APIs 
around the database, which you have created in the previous assignments.

## Conventions

This assignment will be tested by automated functional tests, therefore all 
your  actions in the database (table creation, user creation, insert, update) 
should be reflected in the corresponding `.sql` files. I recommend you to 
use the same environment (MySQL 5.7) when doing this assignment to ensure the 
compatibility of your results with the testing environment.

## Recommendations

Each practical assignment could contain some information not covered in lectures. 
But this should not stop you from its fulfillment. I encourage you to use Google 
to fill gaps in your practical knowledge. However, to reduce 
ambiguity between different information sources, I have added a list of 
recommended links with hints for each unknown point at the end of the assignment. 
It is no shame to use it, but first try to find information by yourself.

If you have any issues with this assignment, please reach me or course assistant 
Mykhailo Poliakov. Feel free to use the course Slack channel to ask questions and 
help your colleagues. If you have any new ideas or improvements, please to send 
pull-request to repository [ucu-databases-course](https://github.com/tsdaemon/ucu-databases-course). Your colleagues will be grateful if you make these instructions better.

## Instructions

In the previous assignment, you have decomposed your data into 6 tables: 
`pets, cohorts, transport_types, assignments, students, 
student_assignments`, and created a view `student_summary`. 
In the current assignment, each table and the view will be a 
[resource](https://restful-api-design.readthedocs.io/en/latest/resources.html) for 
a single REST API in your application. Therefore, in total you will implement 
a web application with 7 APIs.

### Template

I have prepared for you a template of web application, which you can use as a 
starting point. To get it, run: 

```bash
git clone https://github.com/tsdaemon/ucu-databases-course
cd ucu-databases-course/2019/hw3boilerplate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

In this folder you can start your solution. This template has a simple structure:

1. File `start.py` - main entry point of your application.
2. Folder `sql` - folder with scripts to create your database.
3. Folder `students` - example of REST API structure for resource \code{students}.

To test it, run the application: 

```bash
python start.py
```

The result should be something like:

```bash
 * Serving Flask app "start" (lazy loading)
 * Environment: production
   WARNING: Do not use the development server in a production environment.
   Use a production WSGI server instead.
 * Debug mode: off
 * Running on http://127.0.0.1:5000/ (Press CTRL+C to quit)
```

With `curl` you can check that route `students` is available and returns status 
code 501 Not Implemented: 

```bash
curl http://127.0.0.1:5000/students
```

Also check `ucu-databases-course/2019/examples/simple_api.py`. There I have stored
examples of API implemented during our practical sessions.
 
### SQL
I need SQL scripts from your previous assignments to create database structure 
in the test environment. Copy scripts from your previous assignments into 
folder `sql`:

1. `db.sql` - database and user definition from HW1.
2. `tables.sql` - tables structure from HW2.
3. `student_summary.sql` - `student_summary` view from HW2.

### REST APIs

In this homework you should implement 6 read-write APIs (for each table 
in your database) and 1 read-only API (for the view `student_summary`)
Each read-write REST API should implement 5 endpoints:

1. Get all records from the table (`GET /<prefix>/`).
2. Get a single record by `id` (`GET /<prefix>/<int:id>`).
3. Create a new record (`POST /<prefix>/`).
4. Update an existing record (`PUT /<prefix>/`).
5. Delete an existing record (`DELETE /<prefix>/<int:id>`).

Check `students/controller.py` in your template for reference.

Each read-only API should implement 2 endpoints: 

1. Get all records from the view (`GET /<prefix>/`).
2. Get a single record by `id` (`GET /<prefix>/<int:id>`).

Here and above `<prefix>` means name of your REST resource, e.g. your table or your view.

### Data structures

Each API should use the same data structures as defined in corresponding tables or views.
This means that route `GET /students/3` should return a JSON object structured like 
`students` table:

```json
{
	"id": 3,
	"first_name": "Clark",
	"last_name": "Kent",
	"dormitory": true,
	"cohort_id": 1,
	"pet_id": null,
	"transport_type_id": 2
}
```

Consequently, route `GET /students/` should return an array of such objects. 

Route `PUT /students/` should accept the same structure and update a corresponding row 
in your table:

```json
{
	"id": 3,
	"first_name": "Clark (Superman)",
	"last_name": "Kent",
	"dormitory": true,
	"cohort_id": 2,
	"pet_id": null,
	"transport_type_id": 2
}
```

Each update request should contain values for *ALL* columns in your data (partial 
updates are not supported).

Route `POST /students/` should accept the same structure, but without id (because
id is created on the server side):

```json
{
	"first_name": "Barry",
	"last_name": "Allen",
	"dormitory": false,
	"cohort_id": 2,
	"pet_id": 1,
	"transport_type_id": null
}
```

Response from `POST /students/` should contain a created `id` value for a new object:
```json
{
	"id": 4,
	"first_name": "Barry",
	"last_name": "Allen",
	"dormitory": false,
	"cohort_id": 2,
	"pet_id": 1,
	"transport_type_id": null
}
```

### Status codes

REST API reuses standard HTTP codes with its own meaning:

| Case | Code |
|---|---|
| Resource not found (incorrect id, no such row in a table) | 404 |
| Invalid data provided (validation failed) | 422 |
| Resource created | 201 |

You should use this codes in your application.

Codes from the range `5..` means that application contains an error. For example, unhandled
exception will cause response code `500`. Therefore, tests will consider any `5..` response
as an error in your homework.

### Validation

Each API should correctly handle all input data, and notify users if provided data is
invalid. For example, if somebody trying to create a student without a cohort, such case
should be handled, and API should return http code 422.

All validation rules required for this assignment can be inferred from column types in 
your tables. Here is a list (not complete) of possible validation errors:

| Data type | Validation rule |
|---|---|
| VARCHAR(255) | String length should not exceed 255 symbols |
| NOT NULL | Value should never be empty |
| INT | Value should be an integer number |
| DECIMAL, FLOAT | Value should be a number with point |
| FOREIGN KEY | Value should by a valid identifier from a different resource |

### Full list of routes

| Verb | URL |
|---|---|
| *Pets* |
| GET | `/pets/` |
| GET | `/pets/<int:id>` |
| POST | `/pets/` |
| PUT | `/pets/` |
| DELETE | `/pets/<int:id>` |
| *Cohorts* |
| GET | `/cohorts/` |
| GET | `/cohorts/<int:id>` |
| POST | `/cohorts/` |
| PUT | `/cohorts/` |
| DELETE | `/cohorts/<int:id>` |
| *Transport types* |
| GET | `/transport_types/` |
| GET | `/transport_types/<int:id>` |
| POST | `/transport_types/` |
| PUT | `/transport_types/` |
| DELETE | `/transport_types/<int:id>` |
| *Assignments* |
| GET | `/assignments/` |
| GET | `/assignments/<int:id>` |
| POST | `/assignments/` |
| PUT | `/assignments/` |
| DELETE | `/assignments/<int:id>` |
| *Students* |
| GET | `/students/` |
| GET | `/students/<int:id>` |
| POST | `/students/` |
| PUT | `/students/` |
| DELETE | `/students/<int:id>` |
| *Student assignments* |
| GET | `/students_assignments/` |
| GET | `/students_assignments/<int:student_id>/<int:assignment_id>` |
| POST | `/students_assignments/` |
| PUT | `/students_assignments/` |
| DELETE | `/students_assignments/<int:student_id>/<int:assignment_id>` |
| *Student summary* |
| GET | `/student_summary/` |
| GET | `/student_summary/<int:id>` |

### Students assignments

Table `students_assignments` has a slightly different layout than others. Note, that it has a 
composite primary key, which consist of two columns. Also, its key is not generated on the server 
side, it consist from two foreign keys, which are supposed to be known at the time of a record 
creation.  

Therefore `GET` and `DELETE` routes for `students_assignments` should accept 
(instead of a single `id` argument) two arguments: `student_id` and `assignment_id`. Also,
route `POST` does expect primary key to be set in the input data.

## Submission

In your submission you should include file `start.py`, all other python files imported 
in it, and the folder `sql`. 

To submit your solution, pack all files in a single **zip** archive. 
Submit it on assignment page in CMS. After a successful solution upload, you
will get a link to the CircleCI build page. 

**Please test your solution carefully before submission!**

I give you credit for *one* submission fail. This means, if your test fails, 
I will reach to you and explain the error, so you can correct your 
solution, and resubmit it one time without a penalty. All the following 
submission failures  will be penalized.

If you have any issues or errors during submission, please contact me or 
Mykhailo Poliakov.

## Hints
How to ...

1. ... [test REST API with curl](https://www.baeldung.com/curl-rest)
2. ... [test REST API with Postman](https://medium.com/aubergine-solutions/api-testing-using-postman-323670c89f6d)
3. ... [implement REST API with Python and Flask](https://realpython.com/flask-connexion-rest-api/)
4. ... [use HTTP codes in REST API](https://restfulapi.net/http-status-codes/)