
# Practical Assignment 4: Your Own Database
| Course | Author | Year | 
|--------|------------------|----|
|  Data architecture | Anatolii Stehnii | 2019| 

## Introduction

In the previous assignment, you have built a small application, which consist of a 
set of REST APIs around the `university` database. This concludes all you need to learn
in this course about SQL and databases...

...as a software developer. But as for a computer scientist, here your journey only 
begins!

In this assignment, you should implement your own quick-n-dirty DBMS to support your 
REST APIs. Because in tests you will not have a MySQL available anymore - only file 
system.

## Recommendations

Each practical assignment could contain some information not covered in lectures. 
But this should not stop you from its fulfillment. I encourage you to use Google 
to fill gaps in your practical knowledge. However, to reduce 
ambiguity between different information sources, I have added a list of 
recommended links with hints for each unknown point at the end of the assignment. 
It is no shame to use it, but first try to find information by yourself.

If you have any issues with this assignment, please reach me or course assistant 
Mykhailo Poliakov. Feel free to use the course Slack channel to ask questions and 
help your colleagues. If you have any new ideas or improvements, please to send 
pull-request to repository [ucu-databases-course](https://github.com/tsdaemon/ucu-databases-course). Your colleagues will be grateful if you make these instructions better.

## Instructions

It is fairly simple: just remove all the MySQL code from your solution, and start storing
your data at file system. Check this [example](https://github.com/tsdaemon/ucu-databases-course/blob/master/2019/examples/simple_api_no_db.py)
of simple API as a reference of JSON serialization of data into files. Yet using json is 
not required, you can do any crazy thing you can invent. 

The first stage of testing for your application will be the same as in HW 3: it should 
work exactly the same, including input validation, response codes, etc. But it is 
too simple to have just a functional test. Every DBMS deserves to be tested under 
the high-load conditions. Following chapter will explain how this will be done.

## Load and Durability tests

After your application are tested with HW3 test suite, a set 
of load and durability tests will be invoked. Each test includes 
doing random requests to your APIs with random valid data from 
multiple clients. Your application are supposed to process, store, 
and present this information correctly.

1. **Single client, 100 of random requests**: just a smoke test to make
sure that your app has a basic correct implementation of a database.
2. **2 clients, 1000 requests**: this tests whether you application 
implement concurrent usage of shared resources.
3. **10 clients, power outage, 10000 requests**: in the middle of a 
test, it will send your application a `SIGKILL` signal, which 
will immediately stop your application and destroy all data it keeps
in memory. After re-start, your system is suppose to restore a 
correct data state, and continue to work with a minimal amount of
data loss.
4. **Big fat load test**: this part is supposed to challenge your 
DBMS with a most intense load which is possible to simulate in 
the test environment. Time to complete this test will be used 
to rank your submission in the **Competition**.

## Competition

To earn 10 credits for this HW it is enough to pass tests 1 and 2:
I expect your application to work with at least 2 concurrent 
clients to earn a grade. 

However, to challenge the most bright 
and talented minds, this homework includes a global
leaderboard with ranks of your submission. 

Your rank will be calculated based on test stage which you will 
reach in the "Load and Durability tests". Students who will 
reach "Big fat load test" will be ranked based on a test time.
So optimizing your application to process requests faster, 
you can truly experience a real computer science task, and 
compare your results with colleagues.

## Submission

In your submission you should include file `start.py`, all other python files 
imported in it. 

To submit your solution, pack all files in a single **zip** archive. 
Submit it on assignment page in CMS. After a successful solution upload, you
will get a link to the CircleCI build page. 

**Please test your solution carefully before submission!**

Currently you can check your test results on your own, which 
makes my life easier. Given this, you can submit your homework 
as much as you want without being penalized. But only 5 
submissions a day: all following submissions will be rejected.

As usual, if you have any issues or errors during submission, please 
contact me or Mykhailo Poliakov. But if we find out, that 
your problem existed because of you not testing your solution 
properly before submission - we will probably hardly penalize you
for wasting our time.

## Hints
How to ...

1. ... [lock a resource in Python](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZkMi-VgJdQ)
2. ... [validate a data schema with Trafaret](https://trafaret.readthedocs.io/en/latest/intro.html)